# Automatic-vehicle-speed-control-system

**Introduction**

As the days of manned driving are getting extremely numbered, so are those of traffic jams, bad, dangerous and rough drivers and more importantly, accidents.Automation of the driving control of vehicles is one of the most vital need of the hour. This technology can very well implement what was absent before, controlled lane driving. Considering the hazards of driving and their more pronounced effect on vehicles our AUTOMATICVEHICLE SPEED CONTROL SYSTEM is exactly what is required.
Safety is a necessary part of man’s life. Due to the accident cases reported daily on the major roads in all parts of the developed and developing countries, more attention is needed for research in the designing an efficient car driving aiding system. It is expected that if such a device is designed and incorporated into our cars as a road safety device, it will reduce the incidence of accidents on our roads and various premises, with subsequent reduction in loss of life and property. However, a major area of concern of an engineer should be safety, as it concerns the use of his/her inventions and the accompanying dangers due to human limitations.

**Working**

A sheet is being placed on left side of road in traffic prone areas like schools, colonies, hospitals, four ways etc. This is an ordinary sheet which is being made up of any material like aluminum, plastic etc. beside being used in this project this sheet can be utilized for commercial purposes as any brand can commercialize their product through advertisement on it. The length of sheet is taken in such a way that the vehicle of any 
size is able to cross it easily. The vehicle has IR sensor and controller installed on it. The IR sensor is installed on left side of the car. It sends Infrared signals which strikes the sheet and gets reflected back to the LDR in IR sensor . now the resistor of LDR increases  and sends some values to controller. 
The controller automatically converts these signals into Digital signals and if controller receives a signal of adequate intensity only then it will start countingWhen the vehicle enters in the normal area it speeds does not decrease and it goes normally no action is performed. When the vehicle enters into the restricted areas that means it enters intothe speed limiting. Whenever it enters the transmitter module just send information that contains how much speed a vehicle can go inside the speed limited region. Then the signal or information is received by the receiver and the signal acquired from the speed meter is also given to the controller. The signal is basically analogy in nature that will be converted into digital so only the micro controller able to process the signal. The signal from the transmitter and the speed meter is compared by the controller.
In this there are two case: first, the current speed is less than the transmitted speed the vehicle goes normally no action is required. second, the information from the speed meter is greater than the transmitted speed by the transmitter module the controller waits for few second whether the driver reduce the speed to the below value if the driver does not reduce the speed means it automatically takes the control and reduce the speed according to it.at the same time the information is transmitted to The nearest police station. The information contains the vehicle number and the time. The time denotes that at which time the vehicle cross that area. Then the fine or penalty amount is collected by the nearest tollgate or the check post. After that at the end of the speed limit area there is an another transmitter that contains a stop information means the control releases by controller to device.

**Conclusion**

Our project is based on “Automatic Vehicle Speed Control System”, so it has a great significance in termination and reduction of overall accidents and casualties in high traffic prone areas.This project has a system that checks the speed of the vehicle using IR sensors and microcontroller and sends warning signals to driver to lower down the speed if speed is on higher side. Incase driver don’t reduce the speed then within seconds our system will take over the control and will reduce ate speed of vehicle automatically.
Hence,this project is a great life saving system in heavy traffic areas.
